We examined from a cultural perspective how well-being was collectively defined, what were the sources of collective stress, and what kind of collective coping mechanisms were used to alleviate such stress in three divisions of a multinational company. In the first phase of the study we collected data on organizational culture by using individual thematic interviews (N = 63). Applying the grounded theory methodology and an inductive analysis, specific cultures describing the divisions were identified. In terms of co-operation we found the following fundamental cultural recipes: joint focused efforts on money-making, despite the awareness of the common goals employees interested only in fulfilling their own role (jig-saw puzzle), and the awareness of the common goals lacking (scattered islands). In the second phase we conducted group interviews (N = 32) using the critical incident technique to assess collective definitions of well-being, sources of collective stress and respective collective coping mechanisms. These data were complemented with observations at the work site, participant observations at meetings, and analysis of documents. The definitions of well-being varied across cultures as regards their emphasis either on work or on other life domains as sources of well-being. Furthermore, the more hectic the organizational context, the more permissive the collective conception of well-being was. Collective stress emerged as a response to two types of signals: (1) adaptation to the environment of the division or work unit was imperfect (fluctuation, risk of unemployment, continuously changing customer needs, poor client satisfaction, multinational game, group bonus, culture shock due to a merger, work overload, and pressure toward more extensive autonomy), or (2) friction inside the community (undervaluation of a group of employees, and the <U+0093>penal colony<U+0094> reputation). Of the corresponding coping mechanisms, a large proportion were found to be collective, learned uniform responses to remove the stressor, to change the interpretation of the situation or to alleviate negative feelings. In conclusion, our results suggest that stress experiences and coping strategies have collective qualities. Culture not only seems to moderate the appraisal of stress, but also contains collective coping responses to stressors, which seem to have their origin either in the organizational environment or inside the community itself.
